*******************
Inheritance Mapping
*******************

The Three Strategies
=====================

NHibernate supports the three basic inheritance mapping strategies.

-  table per class hierarchy

-  table per subclass

-  table per concrete class

In addition, NHibernate supports a fourth, slightly different kind of
polymorphism:

-  implicit polymorphism

It is possible to use different mapping strategies for different branches of the
same inheritance hierarchy, and then make use of implicit polymorphism to
achieve polymorphism across the whole hierarchy. However, NHibernate does not
support mixing ``<subclass>``, and ``<joined-subclass>`` and
``<union-subclass>`` mappings under the same root ``<class>`` element. It is
possible to mix together the table per hierarchy and table per subclass
strategies, under the the same ``<class>`` element, by combining the
``<subclass>`` and ``<join>`` elements (see below).

It is possible to define ``subclass``, ``union-subclass``, and
``joined-subclass`` mappings in separate mapping documents, directly beneath
``hibernate-mapping``. This allows you to extend a class hierarchy just by
adding a new mapping file. You must specify an ``extends`` attribute in the
subclass mapping, naming a previously mapped superclass.

.. code:: xml

  <hibernate-mapping>
   <subclass name="DomesticCat" extends="Cat" discriminator-value="D">
      <property name="name" type="string"/>
   </subclass>
  </hibernate-mapping>

Table per class hierarchy
--------------------------

Suppose we have an interface ``IPayment``, with implementors
``CreditCardPayment``, ``CashPayment``, ``ChequePayment``. The
table-per-hierarchy mapping would look like:

.. code:: xml

  <class name="IPayment" table="PAYMENT">
    <id name="Id" type="Int64" column="PAYMENT_ID">
      <generator class="native"/>
    </id>
    <discriminator column="PAYMENT_TYPE" type="String"/>
    <property name="Amount" column="AMOUNT"/>
    ...
    <subclass name="CreditCardPayment" discriminator-value="CREDIT">
      ...
    </subclass>
    <subclass name="CashPayment" discriminator-value="CASH">
      ...
    </subclass>
    <subclass name="ChequePayment" discriminator-value="CHEQUE">
      ...
    </subclass>
  </class>

Exactly one table is required. There is one big limitation of this mapping
strategy: columns declared by the subclasses may not have ``NOT NULL``
constraints.

Table per subclass
-------------------

A table-per-subclass mapping would look like:

.. code:: xml

  <class name="IPayment" table="PAYMENT">
    <id name="Id" type="Int64" column="PAYMENT_ID">
      <generator class="native"/>
    </id>
    <property name="Amount" column="AMOUNT"/>
    ...
    <joined-subclass name="CreditCardPayment" table="CREDIT_PAYMENT">
      <key column="PAYMENT_ID"/>
      ...
    </joined-subclass>
    <joined-subclass name="CashPayment" table="CASH_PAYMENT">
      <key column="PAYMENT_ID"/>
      ...
    </joined-subclass>
    <joined-subclass name="ChequePayment" table="CHEQUE_PAYMENT">
      <key column="PAYMENT_ID"/>
      ...
    </joined-subclass>
  </class>

Four tables are required. The three subclass tables have primary key
associations to the superclass table (so the relational model is actually a
one-to-one association).

Table per subclass, using a discriminator
------------------------------------------

Note that NHibernate‚Äùs implementation of table-per-subclass requires no
discriminator column. Other object/relational mappers use a different
implementation of table-per-subclass which requires a type discriminator column
in the superclass table. The approach taken by NHibernate is much more difficult
to implement but arguably more correct from a relational point of view. If you
would like to use a discriminator column with the table per subclass strategy,
you may combine the use of ``<subclass>`` and ``<join>``, as follow:

.. code:: xml

  <class name="Payment" table="PAYMENT">
    <id name="Id" type="Int64" column="PAYMENT_ID">
      <generator class="native"/>
    </id>
    <discriminator column="PAYMENT_TYPE" type="string"/>
    <property name="Amount" column="AMOUNT"/>
    ...
    <subclass name="CreditCardPayment" discriminator-value="CREDIT">
      <join table="CREDIT_PAYMENT">
        <key column="PAYMENT_ID"/>
        <property name="CreditCardType" column="CCTYPE"/>
        ...
      </join>
    </subclass>
    <subclass name="CashPayment" discriminator-value="CASH">
      <join table="CASH_PAYMENT">
        <key column="PAYMENT_ID"/>
        ...
      </join>
    </subclass>
    <subclass name="ChequePayment" discriminator-value="CHEQUE">
      <join table="CHEQUE_PAYMENT" fetch="select">
        <key column="PAYMENT_ID"/>
        ...
      </join>
    </subclass>
  </class>

The optional ``fetch="select"`` declaration tells NHibernate not to fetch the
``ChequePayment`` subclass data using an outer join when querying the
superclass.

Mixing table per class hierarchy with table per subclass
---------------------------------------------------------

You may even mix the table per hierarchy and table per subclass strategies using
this approach:

.. code:: xml

  <class name="Payment" table="PAYMENT">
    <id name="Id" type="Int64" column="PAYMENT_ID">
      <generator class="native"/>
    </id>
    <discriminator column="PAYMENT_TYPE" type="string"/>
    <property name="Amount" column="AMOUNT"/>
    ...
    <subclass name="CreditCardPayment" discriminator-value="CREDIT">
      <join table="CREDIT_PAYMENT">
        <property name="CreditCardType" column="CCTYPE"/>
        ...
      </join>
    </subclass>
    <subclass name="CashPayment" discriminator-value="CASH">
      ...
    </subclass>
    <subclass name="ChequePayment" discriminator-value="CHEQUE">
      ...
    </subclass>
  </class>

For any of these mapping strategies, a polymorphic association to ``IPayment``
is mapped using ``<many-to-one>``.

.. code:: xml

  <many-to-one name="Payment" column="PAYMENT" class="IPayment"/>

Table per concrete class
-------------------------

There are two ways we could go about mapping the table per concrete class
strategy. The first is to use ``<union-subclass>``.

.. code:: xml

  <class name="Payment">
    <id name="Id" type="Int64" column="PAYMENT_ID">
      <generator class="sequence"/>
    </id>
    <property name="Amount" column="AMOUNT"/>
    ...
    <union-subclass name="CreditCardPayment" table="CREDIT_PAYMENT">
      <property name="CreditCardType" column="CCTYPE"/>
      ...
    </union-subclass>
    <union-subclass name="CashPayment" table="CASH_PAYMENT">
      ...
    </union-subclass>
    <union-subclass name="ChequePayment" table="CHEQUE_PAYMENT">
      ...
    </union-subclass>
  </class>

Three tables are involved for the subclasses. Each table defines columns for all
properties of the class, including inherited properties.

The limitation of this approach is that if a property is mapped on the
superclass, the column name must be the same on all subclass tables. (We might
relax this in a future release of NHibernate.) The identity generator strategy
is not allowed in union subclass inheritance, indeed the primary key seed has to
be shared across all unioned subclasses of a hierarchy.

If your superclass is abstract, map it with ``abstract="true"``. Of course, if
it is not abstract, an additional table (defaults to ``PAYMENT`` in the example
above) is needed to hold instances of the superclass.

Table per concrete class, using implicit polymorphism
------------------------------------------------------

An alternative approach is to make use of implicit polymorphism:

.. code:: xml

  <class name="CreditCardPayment" table="CREDIT_PAYMENT">
    <id name="Id" type="Int64" column="CREDIT_PAYMENT_ID">
      <generator class="native"/>
    </id>
    <property name="Amount" column="CREDIT_AMOUNT"/>
    ...
  </class>

  <class name="CashPayment" table="CASH_PAYMENT">
    <id name="Id" type="Int64" column="CASH_PAYMENT_ID">
      <generator class="native"/>
    </id>
    <property name="Amount" column="CASH_AMOUNT"/>
    ...
  </class>

  <class name="ChequePayment" table="CHEQUE_PAYMENT">
    <id name="Id" type="Int64" column="CHEQUE_PAYMENT_ID">
      <generator class="native"/>
    </id>
    <property name="Amount" column="CHEQUE_AMOUNT"/>
    ...
  </class>

Notice that nowhere do we mention the ``IPayment`` interface explicitly. Also
notice that properties of ``IPayment`` are mapped in each of the subclasses. If
you want to avoid duplication, consider using XML entities (e.g.
``[ <!ENTITY allproperties SYSTEM "allproperties.xml"> ]`` in the ``DOCTYPE``
declaration and ``&allproperties;`` in the mapping).

The disadvantage of this approach is that NHibernate does not generate SQL
``UNION``\ s when performing polymorphic queries.

For this mapping strategy, a polymorphic association to ``IPayment`` is usually
mapped using ``<any>``.

.. code:: xml

  <any name="Payment" meta-type="string" id-type="Int64">
    <meta-value value="CREDIT" class="CreditCardPayment"/>
    <meta-value value="CASH" class="CashPayment"/>
    <meta-value value="CHEQUE" class="ChequePayment"/>
    <column name="PAYMENT_CLASS"/>
    <column name="PAYMENT_ID"/>
  </any>

Mixing implicit polymorphism with other inheritance mappings
-------------------------------------------------------------

There is one further thing to notice about this mapping. Since the subclasses
are each mapped in their own ``<class>`` element (and since ``IPayment`` is just
an interface), each of the subclasses could easily be part of another
table-per-class or table-per-subclass inheritance hierarchy! (And you can still
use polymorphic queries against the ``IPayment`` interface.)

.. code:: xml

  <class name="CreditCardPayment" table="CREDIT_PAYMENT">
    <id name="Id" type="Int64" column="CREDIT_PAYMENT_ID">
      <generator class="native"/>
    </id>
    <discriminator column="CREDIT_CARD" type="String"/>
    <property name="Amount" column="CREDIT_AMOUNT"/>
    ...
    <subclass name="MasterCardPayment" discriminator-value="MDC"/>
    <subclass name="VisaPayment" discriminator-value="VISA"/>
  </class>

  <class name="NonelectronicTransaction" table="NONELECTRONIC_TXN">
    <id name="Id" type="Int64" column="TXN_ID">
      <generator class="native"/>
    </id>
    ...
    <joined-subclass name="CashPayment" table="CASH_PAYMENT">
      <key column="PAYMENT_ID"/>
      <property name="Amount" column="CASH_AMOUNT"/>
      ...
    </joined-subclass>
    <joined-subclass name="ChequePayment" table="CHEQUE_PAYMENT">
      <key column="PAYMENT_ID"/>
      <property name="Amount" column="CHEQUE_AMOUNT"/>
      ...
    </joined-subclass>
  </class>

Once again, we don‚Äùt mention ``IPayment`` explicitly. If we execute a query
against the ``IPayment`` interface - for example, ``from IPayment`` - NHibernate
automatically returns instances of ``CreditCardPayment`` (and its subclasses,
since they also implement ``IPayment``), ``CashPayment`` and ``ChequePayment``
but not instances of ``NonelectronicTransaction``.

Limitations
============

There are certain limitations to the ‚Äùimplicit polymorphism‚Äù approach to the
table per concrete-class mapping strategy. There are somewhat less restrictive
limitations to ``<union-subclass>`` mappings.

The following table shows the limitations of table per concrete-class mappings,
and of implicit polymorphism, in NHibernate.

.. list-table:: Features of inheritance mappings
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Inheritance strategy
     - Polymorphic many-to-one
     - Polymorphic one-to-one
     - Polymorphic one-to-many
     - Polymorphic many-to-many
     - Polymorphic ``Load()/Get()``
     - Polymorphic queries
     - Polymorphic joins
   * - table per class-hierarchy
     - ``<many-to-one>``
     - ``<one-to-one>``
     - ``<one-to-many>``
     - ``<many-to-many>``
     - ``s.Get<IPayment>(id)``
     - ``from IPayment p``
     - ``from Order o join o.Payment p``
   * - table per subclass
     - ``<many-to-one>``
     - ``<one-to-one>``
     - ``<one-to-many>``
     - ``<many-to-many>``
     - ``s.Get<IPayment>(id)``
     - ``from IPayment p``
     - ``from Order o join o.Payment p``
   * - table per concrete-class (union-subclass)
     - ``<many-to-one>``
     - ``<one-to-one>``
     - ``<one-to-many>`` (for ``inverse="true"`` only)
     - ``<many-to-many>``
     - ``s.Get<IPayment>(id)``
     - ``from IPayment p``
     - ``from Order o join o.Payment p``
   * - table per concrete class (implicit polymorphism)
     - ``<any>``
     - *not supported*
     - *not supported*
     - ``<many-to-any>``
     - *use a query*
     - ``from IPayment p``
     - *not supported*
